During the last few decades there has been research into using the AST:ALT ratio in the differentiation of alcoholic liver disease (ALD) from other forms of liver disease, particularly the Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) spectrum. Both AST and ALT enzymes require pyridoxal-5’-phosphate (vitamin B6) to function properly. Its absence in nutritionally-deficient heavy-drinkers has a much larger effect on the production of ALT than that of AST, causing the AST:ALT ratio to rise. A normal AST:ALT ratio should be <1. In patients with alcoholic liver disease, the AST:ALT ratio is >1 in 92% of patients, and >2 in 70%.13 AST:ALT scores >2 are, therefore, strongly suggestive of alcoholic liver disease and scores <1 more suggestive of NAFLD/NASH. High ratios reflect the severity of hepatitis or underlying liver disease rather than high alcohol consumption. This means that most heavy-drinkers will not have an AST: ALT ratio >1 as they have not yet developed ALD. No studies have shown that the AST:ALT ratio, either alone or in combination with other factors or models, has the necessary sensitivity or specificity to definitively differentiate between ALD and NAFLD, but it acts as a useful clinical guide when considering the need for liver biopsy. It should also be noted that liver transaminases are known to worsen in response to cessation of alcohol intake (often coinciding with admission to hospital) and that ALT has also been shown to rise simply from admission to hospital, even in patients with no liver disease.
Although models exist which exclude cirrhosis in NAFLD with reasonable accuracy, liver enzyme analysis has so far failed to provide a sensitive and specific enough means to make a diagnosis. At present liver biopsy cannot be avoided in cases where confirmation of NASH or cirrhosis is necessary.
The role of liver enzyme analysis in NAFLD lies in both the early identification and modification of associated metabolic risk factors such as hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and glycaemic control and in risk stratification for the future.
A scoring system developed at the Mayo clinic uses age, hyperglycemia, body mass index, platelet count, albumin, and AST:ALT ratio to accurately differentiate patients with advanced fibrosis in NAFLD. The AST:ALT ratio becomes considerably less specific in determining underlying disease with the development of cirrhosis, as the ratio will increase across a broad range of diseases. It is, however, useful in NAFLD patients known not to be abusing alcohol as a score of >1 should lead to the consideration that the patient may have developed cirrhosis.
